(techno music)
Okay, so we've learned that arrays
are very efficient when it comes to retrieving elements.
They're also memory efficient
because we don't have to store any extra information
with each element in the array.
You'll see later on
that with many of the other data structures,
we can't just store the value.
We have to store extra information with the value,
but that's not true for arrays.
So arrays are efficient
when you know the index of the value you wanna retrieve
and they're also memory efficient.
So let's quickly review here.
To retrieve an element from an array when we have its index,
we multiply the size of the element by its index,
and remember every element in the array
will have the same size,
and multiplying the size of the element by its index
gives us the offset from the beginning of the array.
And then of course we need to start address of the array
and we add the start address to the offset of the element
and boom, we have the memory address of the element.
So once again, to get intArray[0],
if we're starting at address 12,
assuming that's our array start address,
that would be 12 plus zero times four which is 12.
To get one would be 12 plus one times four to get 16, etc.
So it doesn't matter how many elements we have in the array.
If we have one element in the array,
it's gonna take us three steps
to retrieve the element, right?
These three steps here.
Any element in the array.
If we have a thousand elements in the array
and we have an index of an element, three steps.
If we have a hundred thousand elements in the array
and we wanna retrieve an element, three steps.
A million elements, three steps.
A billion elements, three steps.
And so as you can see,
unlike our adding sugar to your tea example,
the number of steps does not change
as the number of items changes.
So if the number of elements is equal to n,
the steps to retrieve never changes.
And when we have this situation,
we have what's known as constant time complexity
and that's designated by O of one.
And so our adding to sugar to tea algorithm
had a linear time complexity which was O of n
because n influenced how many steps were required
in a liner fashion.
But here when it comes to retrieving an element
from an array when you have an array index,
the number of items in the array
has absolutely no effect on the number of steps.
The number of steps is always going to be constant
and so this has a constant time complexity
which is O of one.
It means that as the number of items increases,
the algorithm doesn't degrade at all.
So when it comes to retrieval,
one of the advantages of arrays
is that retrieving an element when you have its index
can be done in O of one time which is the best you can get.
And so that's one of the advantages of arrays.
So let's take a look at some of the disadvantages of arrays
so let's go back to the IDE.
So we have our array here
and let's say we read these numbers in a file
or from a database or something so we don't see this.
I mean, this could be anything.
And then we have maybe an interface
where we let a user type in search values
and let's say the user typed something in
and because of what they typed in,
we want to retrieve the number seven from the array.
Now remember you don't have this information.
We're pretending we read values in from a file.
We have no idea where integers were added into the array.
So somebody comes along now and says,
"Get me number seven from the array,
"but I don't know what the index is."
So all of a sudden,
we can't just go right to the position in the array
because we don't know the index for number seven
so what do we have to do?
Well, we're gonna have to do something like this.
I'll change our code here and instead of printing out,
we're gonna say if intArray[I] = 7 then we're done.
So I'll say break, but what I'll do here is just say
int index = minus 1
and then when we find the seven we'll say index = i
because that's the index for seven.
And then after the loop we'll print the index.
Let me make some room here.
So we're expecting of course three to be returned
so let's run
and indeed the index that's returned is three.
But we couldn't just jump to seven
'cause we had no idea where seven was in the array.
So when we've been talking about retrievals,
we've been taking about retrievals
when we know what the index is.
In this case, we didn't know what the index is.
Somebody came along.
They didn't say give me the element at index three.
Instead they said give me seven
and that's all they said, give me the value seven,
get that from the array
and we're like well we don't know where it is
so we had to search for it.
And so remember for Big O notation,
we always consider the worse case.
So what would be the worse case for this?
Well, the worse case would be
that seven was in the last position in the array
and so the worse case is that we had to search
the entire array before we found seven.
Now there are seven items in the array
so n equals seven for this example
and that means we would have had to have looped n times.
And so in this situation,
the number of elements does influence
how many steps we're gonna have to perform.
Because if we have 100 items in the array,
then in the worse case,
we're gonna have to loop 100 times.
If we have a thousand items in the array, in the worse case,
we're gonna have to loop a thousand times.
If we have a million items in the array,
worse case, a million times.
So this looks like linear time complexity, right?
Because when n is one, we have to loop once.
When n is 10, we have to loop 10 times.
When n is a thousand, we have to loop a thousand times.
So it's progressing in a linear manner.
And so retrieval when we know the index,
we can do that in O of one time.
But retrieval when we do not know the index,
the O value for that is O of n
because we have to find the item first
and in the worse case,
we'd have to loop over the entire array.
So let's go back now to the slides
so we can talk about the time complexity
for some of the other array operations.
Okay, we know that retrieving with an index,
we went through this, is constant time.
Now we just talked about retrieving an element
when we don't know its index,
that means we have to search the array.
And in the worse case,
we have to search the entire array
so the time complexity is linear time.
That's similar to the situation we had
with putting sugars in the tea.
The number of steps increases in a linear fashion
as n increases.
So let's think about adding an element to a full array.
So with our intArray,
it was already full so if we came along
and for some reason we wanted to add an eighth integer,
we can't add it into the array because the array is full.
We've learned arrays are not a dynamic data structure.
Their length is fixed.
So the only way that we could add an integer,
another integer into an array
is if we created a brand new array
that had a length large enough to take the existing integers
and the new integer.
So what we'd have to do is create a brand new array
and then copy the integers over.
And so this would also take linear time
because creating the array
doesn't depend on the number of elements
and adding the new integer
doesn't depend on the number of elements.
We just have to know where in the array to add it,
so we'd have the index for that,
but we have to copy all the existing elements
into the new array,
which means we're gonna have to loop over the entire array.
So once again, this is O of n, linear time.
Now if we want to add an element to the end of an array
that has space in it
and assuming we know the index of where to add the element,
well that's gonna be O to the one
because that's similar to retrieving an element.
When we have the index,
we can figure out the memory address
of where the new element is going to go
just by using our simple calculation
and so that's also constant time.
And the same thing if we want to insert or update an element
to this specific index.
We can do that in constant time
because if we have the index,
we can jump right to the memory location.
Now if we want to delete an element
and we're gonna delete it by just setting it to null
or in the case of integers zero or minus one
or something like that,
we can also do that in constant time
because all we have to do, if we have the index,
is jump right to the memory location.
Now if we did not have the index,
I don't have this on the chart,
then it would take linear time
because we'd have to search for the element first.
So somebody came along and said,
"Delete the number seven by setting it to minus one,"
we'd have to search through the array first
to find the number seven.
Now if we want to delete an element
and we don't want to have nulls in our array
or placeholders like minus one
'cause that's basically dead space,
so what we wanna do is when we delete an item
in the middle of an array,
we wanna shift all the other elements down.
In the worse case,
that will be O of n because in the worse case,
we're gonna wanna delete the element
right at the front of the array.
And if we wanna shift all the other elements down,
we're gonna have to loop over all the remaining elements
and push them down.
So that would be a linear time complexity.
So essentially, if we have to loop over the array in any way
in order to perform an operation,
that's gonna have a linear time complexity.
If we don't have to loop over the array
because we have an index
and so we can just calculate the memory address
of the element we wanna work on,
then that's going to have a constant time complexity.
So an easy way for arrays to remember the time complexity
is if the code requires a loop,
it's gonna be linear time.
If the code does not require a loop,
then it's constant time.
Now I've gone through this fairly quickly
because we're talking about arrays
and this isn't a beginner course
so I assume that you know what an array is
and you would have some idea of how to code for example
retrieving an array element when you don't have the index
or deleting an element when you don't have the index
by setting it to null
or adding an element to the end of an array
that has space that you would know to write the code
that keeps track of the last empty position, etc.
So I'm not gonna code those.
And that's all I'm gonna touch on for arrays
because this really was meant to be a review
and I wanna get into the sort algorithms.
Now that we've looked at arrays
and we have some idea of the time complexity
for these different array operations,
we can now get into sort algorithms
and we have a way of comparing
how well a sort algorithm performs compared to another one.
So I'll see you in the next video.